---
title: "The Fast Fourier Transform"
date: 2024-12-16 00:00:00 +0100
categories: [Algorithm, Maths, History]
tags: [history,algorithm,transformation,fourier,math]
---

## A historical journey

Back in 1822, Joseph Fourier wrote, in [The Analytical Theory of Heat](https://books.google.de/books?hl=ca&lr=&id=-N8EAAAAYAAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PR2&dq=the+analytical+theory+of+heat&ots=SqseOECCRG&sig=ySp560OEWuzFranr_Qa31utV0Yg&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q=the%20analytical%20theory%20of%20heat&f=false), that any continuous periodic function could be expressed as a sum of simple sinusoidal waves. This simple assertion, initially met with high skepticism by prominent mathematicians of the time, came to be one of the most powerful mathematical tools in history. 

For the first century, though, the Fourier Transform in itself did not have as glamorous impact as it would came to. When the first computers arrived, calculating a Fourier Transform proved to be a O($N^2$) complexity problem. To give a numerical example, a 100-point signal would require 10.000 operations, while a 1000-point signal would escalate to 1 million operations. At the early times of computing, this was unassumable. 

In 1965, James W. Cooley and John W. Tukey published, in the journal Mathematics and Computation, the work ["An Algorithm for the Machine Calculation of Complex Fourier Series"](https://www.jstor.org/stable/2003354?casa_token=Lu-JDVq8qF4AAAAA%3AyWjI0ZYpUSQXLmjg0P8LLVmQDvlvb9Q-g29qAJ2QMD6o4RczrLP1s9dJEy1Z7e26GNfvk8Lrulm4Wu49ucWh1qPBQJg5h-NRBHAnqKHd_-ggyLT202ZF). This brilliant 5-page paper presents the algorithm to reduce the complexity of the Fourier Transform from $$O(N^2)$$ to $$O(NlogN)$$. This reduction went on to revolutionize signal processing. 

It is worth noting that, one century and a half before that, Carl Friedreich Gauss had come to a very similar algorithm in order to calculate asteroid orbits. His work was written in latin and published in 1866, eleven years after his death, yet it included the core elements of what is nowadays referred to as the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT). 

The FFT's discovery coincided with the dawn of the digital age, which enabled: 
- Digital audio processing
- Medical imaging (CT or MRI)
- Wireless communication
- Space exploration and radio astronomy
- Seismic analysis
... amongst many others

## Mathematical foundations

Let's delve onto how the FFT works. The starting point is the Discrete Fourier Transform, which is the discrete version (as the name implies) of the Fourier Transform: 

$$X[k] = \sum_{n=0}^{N-1}x(n) e^{-\frac{j2\pi nk}{N}}$$

Where $n$ is the time index, $k$ is the frequency, $$N$$ is the sequence length and $$e^{-\frac{j2\pi nk}{N}}$$ is the complex exponential.

The fantastic approach from Cooley-Tukey lies in the separation of different sequences: 
1. Split the N-point sequence into two N/2-point sequences:
    - Even-indexed points: $$x[0]$$,$$x[2]$$,$$x[4]$$,...
    - Odd-indexed points:  $$x[1]$$,$$x[3]$$,$$x[5]$$,...
2. Compute the DFT for each sequence.
3. Merge the results using the "butterfly" operation: 

$$
X[k] = E[k] + W_N^k O[k]$$
$$
X[k+N/2] = E[k] - W_N^k O[k]
$$

Where $E[k]$ is the transform for even-indexed points and $$O[k]$$ for odd-indexed points, and $$W_N^k = e^{-\frac{j2\pi nk}{N}}$$ is the "twiddle factor" (the first people to coin the name "twiddle factor" were [W. M. Gentleman and G. Sande](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1464291.1464352) in 1966).

Some mathematical properties that derive from the FFT: 
1. Linearity: $$FT(ax + by) = aFT(x) + bFT(y)$$
2. Time-shift: if $$x(t) → X(f)$$, then $$x(t-t₀) → X(f)e^{(-j2πft_0)}$$
3. Frequency-shift: if $$x(t) → X(f)$$, then $$x(t)e^{(j2πf₀t)} → X(f-f₀)$$
4. Parseval's theorem: Energy is conserved between time and frequency domains.

## Let's try in Python

```
import numpy as np

def cooley_tukey_fft(x):

    N = len(x)

    if N <= 1:
        return x

    even = cooley_tukey_fft(x[0::2])
    odd = cooley_tukey_fft(x[1::2])

    twiddle_factors = np.exp(-2j * np.pi * np.arange(N) / N)

    first_half = even + twiddle_factors[:N//2] * odd
    second_half = even + twiddle_factors[N//2:] * odd

    return np.concatenate([first_half, second_half])

sample_rate = 1e4
t = np.linspace(0, 1, sample_rate)
signal = np.sin(2*np.pi*15*t) + 0.5*np.sin(2*np.pi*30*t)

fft_result = cooley_tukey_fft(signal)
```
The code uses numpy in order to calculate the FFT, following the approach from Cooley-Tukey. 

The Fast Fourier Transform represents one of the most beautiful marriages between mathematics, computing and practical applications. From the original foundations from Fourier to the ingenuous implementation of Cooley and Tukey (and Gauss), the FFT has become a cornerstone of modern civilisation. 